---
title: "PESO CI BoF"
#
# startdate: "2026-02-10"
startdate: "2026-02-11"
# startdate: "2026-02-12"
#
# time: "11:00am - 12:30pm EST"
time: "1:00pm - 2:30pm EST"
# time: "3:00pm - 4:30pm EST"
#
location: Online
#
type: Birds-of-a-Feather Session 
series: 
  - "CASS BoF Days"
#
venue: "2026 CASS BoF Days"
#
activities:
  - "PESO"
  - "RAPIDS"
#
registration-url: https://argonne.zoomgov.com/meeting/register/p-YuRgJCTUGvH2Cjv8Bphg
#
presenters:
  - name: Vicente Adolfo Bolea Sanchez
    affiliation: Kitware, Inc
  - name: Prof. Sameer Shende
    affiliation: University of Oregon
  - name: Ryan Krattiger
    affiliation: Kitware, Inc
  - name: Daniel Arndt
    affiliation: Oak Ridge National Laboratory
#
# artifacts:
#   - label: Slides
#     url: /assets/artifacts/cass-bof-days/
---
This Birds-of-a-Feather (BoF) session, *PESO CI BOF*, provides a vital platform for the HPC community to explore the current state, ongoing challenges, and future trajectory of Continuous Integration (CI) testing.

The discussion is structured around three main segments. It begins by examining the University of Oregon's Frank Cluster and Spack CI, highlighting its resources on gitlab.spack.io, celebrating community successes, and introducing the potential for transitioning synchronization to the HubCast technology. This leads into the CI in HPC systems (facility CI) segment, which is dedicated to addressing the unique difficulties of implementing CI at major facilities, detailing available resources, and including a live demonstration with ADIOS2.

The session will culminate with a forward-looking panel on the future of CI. This discussion will confront critical operational burdens, such as debugging issues from remote CI runners, tracking infrastructure lifecycles, and managing overall CI load. The panel will also showcase the advanced capabilities of HubCast, emphasizing its potential for faster, more secure, and expanded synchronization. The BoF will conclude with an open forum guided by a panel of confirmed experts from institutions including the University of Oregon, Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF), and, Kitware.
